What Is a Build Tool?

A build tool is essential for the process of building, as these are the tools that automate the process of creating applications from the source code. 
The build tool compiles and packages the code into an executable form.

A build tool does the following tasks:

	Generates source code
	Generates documentation from the source code
	Compiles source code
	Packages the compiled codes into JAR files
	Installs the packaged code in the local repository, server, or central repository

	------------------------------------------------------------
	What Is a Maven Repository?

	Maven repositories refer to the directories of packaged JAR files that contain metadata. The metadata refers to the POM 
  files relevant to each project. This metadata is what enables Maven to download dependencies.

	There are three types of repositories:
	1. Local Repository:

	Local repository refers to the developer's machine, which is where all the project material is saved. This repository contains all the dependency jars.
	2. Remote Repository:

	The remote repository refers to the repository present on a web server, which is used when Maven needs to download dependencies. 
  This repository works the same as the central repository. Whenever anything is required from the remote repository, it is first 
  downloaded to the local repository, and then used.

	3. Central Repository:

	Central repository refers to the Maven community that comes into action when there is a need for dependencies, and those dependencies 
  cannot be found in the local repository. Maven downloads the dependencies from here whenever needed.
	------------------------------------------------------------

	Project Object Model (POM)

	Project Object Model (POM) refers to the XML files with all the information regarding project and configuration details
	It contains the project description, as well as details regarding the versioning and configuration management of the project
	The XML file is in the project home directory. Maven searches for the POM in the current directory when any given task needs to be executed
	------------------------------------------------------------

	Dependencies And Repositories

	Dependencies refer to the Java libraries required for the project. Repositories refer to the directories of packaged JAR files.
	If the dependencies are not present in your local repository, then Maven downloads them from a central repository and stores them in the local repository.
	------------------------------------------------------------

	Running Maven

	When you have installed Maven and have created a POM file and put the POM file in the root directory of your project, you can run Maven on your project.

	Running Maven is done by executing the mvn command from a command prompt. When executing the mvn command you pass the name of a build 
  life cycle, phase or goal to it, which Maven then executes. Here is an example:

	mvn install

	This command executes the build phase called install (part of the default build life cycle), which builds the project and copies the 
  packaged JAR file into the local Maven repository. Actually, this command executes all build phases before install in the build phase 
  sequence, before executing the install build phase.

	You can execute multiple build life cycles or phases by passing more than one argument to the mvn command. Here is an example:

	mvn clean install

	This command first executes the clean build life cycle, which removes compiled classes from the Maven output directory, and then it executes the install build phase.

	You can also execute a Maven goal (a subpart of a build phase) by passing the build phase and goal name concatenated with a : in between, as parameter to the Maven command.
	mvn dependency:copy-dependencies

	This command executes the copy-dependencies goal of the dependency build phase.
	------------------------------------------------------------

	Standard Maven Directory Structure

	The standard Maven directory structure looks like this:

	myprojectdir
		- pom.xml
		- .mvn
			- jvm.config
		- src
			- main
				- java
				- resources
			- test
				- java
				- resources
		- target
The above directories are the most commonly used directories of a Maven project.

The myprojectdir is the root dir for your project. You are free to choose whatever directory name you want for your project.

The pom.xml file is the Maven POM file (Project Object Model).

The .mvn directory is a directory where you can put some Maven configuration files. One of these Maven configuration files is the 
jvm.config file which can be used to configure the Java VM that is used by Maven to build your project. Some of the settings you can 
set in this file are the Maven memory limits.

The src directory is the root directory for both application and test source code.

The application source code goes into src/main/java. Any resource files (e.g. property files) needed by your application goes into the 
src/main/resources directories. The resource files will be available for loading via the classpath.

The test source code goes into src/test/java. Any resource files (e.g. property files) needed by your test code goes into src/test/resources. 
The resource files will be available for loading via the classpath.

The target directory contains all the final products that are the result of Maven building your project. The target directory also contain 
any temporary and intermediate files needed by Maven when building your application.
------------------------------------------------------------

Maven Commands->

Maven contains a wide set of commands which you can execute. Maven commands are a mix of build life cycles, build phases and build goals.

Common Maven Commands->

mvn -version--> Prints out the version of Maven you are running.
mvn clean--> Clears the target directory into which Maven normally builds your project.
mvn package-> Builds the project and packages the resulting JAR file into the target directory.
mvn package -Dmaven.test.skip=true-> Builds the project and packages the resulting JAR file into the target directory - without running the unit tests during the build.
mvn clean package-> Clears the target directory and Builds the project and packages the resulting JAR file into the target directory.
mvn clean package -Dmaven.test.skip=true-> Clears the target directory and builds the project and packages the resulting JAR file into the target directory - without running the unit tests during the build.
mvn verify-> Runs all integration tests found in the project.
mvn clean verify-> Cleans the target directory, and runs all integration tests found in the project.
mvn install Builds-> the project described by your Maven POM file and installs the resulting artifact (JAR) into your local Maven repository
mvn install -Dmaven.test.skip=true-> Builds the project described by your Maven POM file without running unit tests, and installs the resulting artifact (JAR) into your local Maven repository
mvn clean install-> Clears the target directory and builds the project described by your Maven POM file and installs the resulting artifact (JAR) into your local Maven repository
mvn clean install -Dmaven.test.skip=true-> Clears the target directory and builds the project described by your Maven POM file without running unit tests, and installs the resulting artifact (JAR) into your local Maven repository
mvn dependency:copy-dependencies-> Copies dependencies from remote Maven repositories to your local Maven repository.
mvn clean dependency:copy-dependencies-> Cleans project and copies dependencies from remote Maven repositories to your local Maven repository.
mvn clean dependency:copy-dependencies package-> Cleans project, copies dependencies from remote Maven repositories to your local Maven repository and packages your project.
mvn dependency:tree-> Prints out the dependency tree for your project - based on the dependencies configured in the pom.xml file.
mvn dependency:tree -Dverbose-> Prints out the dependency tree for your project - based on the dependencies configured in the pom.xml file. Includes repeated, transitive dependencies.
mvn dependency:tree -Dincludes=com.fasterxml.jackson.core-> Prints out the dependencies from your project which depend on the com.fasterxml.jackson.core artifact.
mvn dependency:tree -Dverbose -Dincludes=com.fasterxml.jackson.core  ->Prints out the dependencies from your project which depend on the com.fasterxml.jackson.core artifact. Includes repeated, transitive dependencies.
mvn dependency:build-classpath-> Prints out the classpath needed to run your project (application) based on the dependencies configured in the pom.xml file.


Keep in mind, that when you execute the clean goal of Maven, the target directory is removed, meaning you lose all compiled classes from previous builds. 
That means, that Maven will have to build all of your project again from scratch, rather than being able to just compile the classes that were changed since 
last build. This slows your build time down. However, sometimes it can be nice to have a clean, fresh build.

Maven Command Structure

A Maven command consists of two elements:
  mvn
  One or more build life cycles, build phases or build goals

Here is a Maven command example:
  mvn clean
This command consists of the mvn command which executes Maven, and the build life cycle named clean.

Here is another Maven command example:
  mvn clean install
This maven command executes the clean build life cycle and the install build phase in the default build life cycle.


Build Life Cycles, Phases and Goals ->
As mentioned in the introduction in the section about Build life cycles, build phases and build goals, Maven contains three major build life cycles:
  clean
  default
  site

Inside each build life cycle there are build phases, and inside each build phase there are build goals.

You can execute either a build life cycle, build phase or build goal. When executing a build life cycle you execute all build phases 
(and thus build goals) inside that build life cycle.

When executing a build phase you execute all build goals within that build phase. Maven also executes all build phases earlier in the build life 
cycle of the desired build phase.

Build goals are assigned to one or more build phases. When the build phases are executed, so are all the goals in that build phase. You can also 
execute a build goal directly.



Executing Build Life Cycles, Phases and Goals
When you run the mvn command you pass one or more arguments to it. These arguments specify either a build life cycle, build phase or build goal. 
For instance, to execute the clean build life cycle you execute this command:
  mvn clean

To execute the site build life cycle you execute this command:
  mvn site



Executing the Default Life Cycle
The default life cycle is the build life cycle which generates, compiles, packages etc. your source code.
You cannot execute the default build life cycle directly, as is possible with the clean and site. Instead you have to execute a specific build phase 
within the default build life cycle.

The most commonly used build phases in the default build life cycle are: ->
Build Phase Description ->
validate -> Validates that the project is correct and all necessary information is downloaded. This also makes sure the dependencies are available.
compile -> Compiles the source code of the project.
test -> Runs the tests against the compiled source code using a suitable unit testing framework. These tests should not require the code be packaged or deployed.
package -> Packs the compiled code in its distributable format, such as a JAR.
install -> Install the package into the local repository, for use as a dependency in other projects locally.
deploy -> Copies the final package to the remote repository for sharing with other developers and projects.

Executing one of these build phases is done by simply adding the build phase after the mvn command, like this:
  mvn compile

This example Maven command executes the compile build phase of the default build life cycle. This Maven command also executes all earlier build phases 
in the default build life cycle, meaning the validate build phase.

Executing Build Phases
You can execute a build phase located inside a build life cycle by passing the name of the build phase to the Maven command. Here are a few build 
phase command examples:
mvn pre-clean
mvn compile
mvn package

Maven will find out what build life cycle the specified build phase belongs to, so you don't need to explicitly specify which build life cycle the build phase belongs to.